#commands #mounting

## **`lsblk`**

**`lsblk`** is a command that shows **block storage devices** in the system. It lists disks, partitions, and where they are mounted. It helps you see the storage structure quickly. For example, it shows devices like `/dev/sda`, `/dev/sda1`, their size, and the **mount point** if they are mounted.

---

## **Mounting**

**Mounting** means **attaching a filesystem to the Linux directory tree** so the system can access it. In Linux, everything is accessed through one directory tree starting from `/`. When you mount a disk or partition, you connect it to a directory so its files become accessible.

**Mounting is attaching a filesystem from a device to a directory in the Linux filesystem tree. That directory is called a mountpoint.**

---

## **Mountpoint**

**Mountpoint** is simply the **directory where the filesystem is attached**. For example, if a partition is mounted on `/data`, then `/data` is the mountpoint. When you open `/data`, you are actually viewing the files stored on that disk or partition.

Short example idea:

- Disk partition: `/dev/sdb1`
- Mounted to: `/backup`
- `/backup` → **mountpoint**
- After mounting, the files inside `/dev/sdb1` appear under `/backup`.

---
## **More Info**

Most device blocks are located inside `/dev` directory.
We mount mostly  them to `/mnt` directory. 

When we see device blocks with `lsblk`:
```bash
NAME          MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINTS
sr0            11:0    1 1024M  0 rom
nvme0n1       259:0    0   20G  0 disk
├─nvme0n1p1   259:1    0  600M  0 part /boot/efi
├─nvme0n1p2   259:2    0    1G  0 part /boot
└─nvme0n1p3   259:3    0 18.4G  0 part
  ├─rhel-root 253:0    0 16.4G  0 lvm  /
  └─rhel-swap 253:1    0    2G  0 lvm  [SWAP]
```

For packages, we chose `sr0`, because **that is where the RHEL installation media (ISO/DVD) is connected**. 
We need to mount it: 

```bash
mount /dev/sr0 /mnt
```

