#package-managers #configuration #mounting #commands

As I mentioned, we actually use `dnf` when we write `yum` [[01. Introduction to Package Management|command]]. So the commands here are actually about `dnf`. We will learn to use it.

---
## **1.  Find Device and Mount it**

When we download a big size iso file from the red hat website, it includes a lot of packages which we use in daily life. However, the packages inside iso file cannot be directly used by Linux System. It is in a disk device and we need to [[02. Lsblk, Mounting and Mountpoint|mount]] it before the usage.

First we need to analyze disks in our system and find the proper disk which is iso disk and include packages:

```bash
lsblk
```

Here, we will see the line `sr0            11:0    1  9.5G  0 rom`. By default it does not have any mountpoint and we need to set it. 
We can set its mountpoint anywhere in the system, however it is recommended to use `/mnt` directory for it:

```bash
mount /dev/sr0 /mnt/
#sr0 is located in /dev directory
```


> [!Warning] Warning about `mount`
> This kind of mounting process is temporary. So, that is why we need to run `mount /dev/sr0 /mnt/` command each time we restart the machine. 
> **How to make this mount [[01. Introduction to fstab file|permanent]]?**
> We need to open `/etc/fstab` file and add this line to end of the file:
> `/dev/sr0    /mnt    iso9660    defaults  0 0`
> *If we run `blkid /dev/sr0` command, we find the type which is `iso9660`.*

Now we can `ll` and see the contents in `/mnt/`. There are two main directories: `AppStream` and `BaseOS`:

- **BaseOS**
	- Contains the core system packages: kernel, basic libraries, shell, core utilities.
	- These packages are essential for the OS to boot and run.
	- Think of it as the minimal RHEL system.
- **AppStream**
	- Contains **additional software and modules** that are optional.
	- This includes development tools, database packages, languages, and other applications.
	- RHEL uses **modules** here, so you can enable a specific version of software without affecting the core system.

The packages are inside `BaseOS/Packages` and `AppStream/Packages`. Too the counts of the packages inside we can run `ll | wc` command.

----

## **2. Repositories**

In the first step our packages in our system are accessible. However it is time to explain the system that whenever we run proper command to install any package, it should search it from this directory (mountpoint). 

When we run `yum` command, it does not search full the system, it comes to repositories and find the proper locations from here. The directory to put the repositories is `/etc/yum.repos.d`.

We create a file here a repository with the extension of `.repo` for package directories like `AppStream` or `BaseOS`.

If we use only local packages (downloaded from iso file), we need to create two repositories, one for `AppStream`, another for `BaseOS`.

---

## **3. Setting Repositories (Manually)**

There are two ways to set repository: manual and with command. First we learn how to do it manually:

Let's start with `BaseOS`:

```bash
vi BaseOS.repo
#Extension is mandotary. Name might be different, however it is good to choose the same name with package directory.
```

We need to fill the repo file using this structure:

```bash
[BaseOS]  
name=  
baseurl=
enabled=
gpgcheck=
gpgkey=
```

There are 6 lines here to fill:

- `[BaseOS]` - The **ID** of the repo. Might be anything.
- `name` - A **human-readable name**. Might be anything.
- `baseurl` - It is the main part. Here we specify the path of packages' location. There are three ways to fill this field:
	- **Local** - If the packages are in local (like iso), we type `file:///mnt/BaseOS`. `file://` is starting part, then we write the path in the system.
	- **Global** - Sometimes we get the packages from a global website. We have a link and we just need to paste it here. Example: `https://redhat.develop.com/Package/repo/`.
	- **Another Machine** - Sometimes it is dangerous to have an access to internet, however we do not need the specific packages in our local. In that case we need to have another machine who has internet access and downloaded many the packages. Our machine fetches proper packages from there. In that kind of cases, we type: `ftp://192.168.55.55/develop`. Both machines should become in the same network.
- `enabled` - It makes this repo active if it is `1`.
- `gpgcheck` - It disables/enables signature checking (optional; for local ISOs it’s fine). Disable is `0`, enable is `1`. 
- `gpgkey` - When `gpgcheck` is `1`, we need paste our token here. Otherwise we do not write this line.

----

## **4. Setting Repository (Using Command)**

We have a command to set a repository without manually creating and writing repo files. It makes our process easier. It automatically creates a file, and add `ID label`, `baseurl` and `enables` lines. However it does not add `gpgcheck` and `gpgkey` lines, we need to do it manually. If we have `gpgkey`, we need to add both lines, otherwise just `gpgcheck=0`.

```bash
yum config-manager --add-repo=/mnt/AppStream
```

Here in `--add-repo` part we type the path of packages' location. As I mentioned, it might become **local**, **global** or **another machine** location.

---

## **5. Troubleshooting**

If any error occurs while the package installation process, there are some steps to troubleshoot the problem:
1) `ll /mnt/` - To check whether we mount the disk successfully or not.
2) `ll /etc/yum.repos.d` - To check whether we create repositories successfully or not.
3) `cat /etc/yum.repos.d/<REPO_NAME>.repo` - To see whether we add all mandatory fields successfully or not.
4) `yum repolist` - It is a `yum` command to see all repositories. However, it is not always reliable, so the previous stages might be better. 
5) `yum update` - It is also a good step to check. If update process is not successful, there is a definitely a problem.
