#package-managers #commands 

 We have learned about [[03. Configuration of Package Manager (DNF)|configuration of Package Manager YUM]]. There are some commands in `yum` ([[01. Introduction to Package Management|actually]] `dnf`).

---

## **`yum repolist`**

This command shows all **enabled repositories** and how many packages each contains.

```bash
yum repolist
#Useful to check if your mounted ISO repo is detected.
```

---

## **`yum search <PACKAGE>`**

This command searches all enabled repos for packages matching a name or description. Example:

```bash
yum search vim
#This will list all packages that have “vim” in their name or description.
```

---

## **`yum whatprovides <PACKAGE>`**

This command finds which package provides a specific file or command. Example:

```bash
yum whatprovides /usr/bin/vim
#This shows the package that contains the `vim` binary.
```

----

## **`yum info <PACKAGE>`**

This command shows detailed info about a package: version, size, repo, summary, and description. Example:

```bash
yum info vim
```

---

## **`yum install <PACKAGE>`**

This command installs the package and all its dependencies from enabled repos.

```bash
yum install vim
```

---

## **`yum remove <PACKAGE>`**

This command uninstalls the package from the system.

```bash
yum remove vim
```

---

## **`yum update`**

This command updates **all installed packages** to the latest version available in enabled repos. While updating it removes the previous versions of the packages. However there is an exception which is kernel. This command updates kernel itself, too. However it does not remove the previous version of kernel.

```bash
yum update
#Updates everything, including dependencies.
```

You can also update a single package:

```bash
yum update vim
```

---

## **`yum list all/installed`**

**`yum list all`** → lists **all packages available** from enabled repos, whether installed or not.

```bash
yum list all
```

**`yum list installed`** → lists only **packages currently installed** on your system.

```bash
yum list installed
```


> [!Info] Installed Package Search
> We can use this command to know whether a specific package is downloaded or not:
> `rpm -q httpd`


---

## **`yum clean all`**

This command clears **all cached data**: metadata, headers, and downloaded packages. It is useful when repos change or packages are corrupted in the cache. It forces `yum` to refresh everything next time you run it.

```bash
yum clean all
```