#introduction #users #permissions #files

## **What is Linux Users?**

In Linux, **users** are accounts that can log in and use the system. Each user has a **username**, a **UID (User ID number)**, a **home directory** (like `/home/mr_ravan`), a **default shell** (like `/bin/bash`).
Linux is a multi-user system, so many users can exist at the same time — even if only one person uses the computer. Everything in Linux (files, processes) belongs to a user.
There are:

- **Regular users** → normal work, limited permissions
- **Root user** → UID 0, full control over the system
- **System users** → used by services (like nginx, sshd), not real people

----
## **How to create a new user?**

We need to use `useradd <USERNAME>` command to create a new user, to provide its with password we need to use `passwd <USERNAME>` command:

```bash
useradd mr-ravan
passwd mr-ravan #It will prompt you to enter password
```

`passwd` command can create or modify the password. Without any argument, by default it changes current user's password.

---
## **How to switch between users?**

Our command to switch between users is `su`. Without any argument it tries to switch to root user. There are two types of `su` command: `su <USERNAME>` or `su - <USERNAME>`.

- `su <USERNAME>` → Switches user **but keeps your current environment** (PATH, variables, working directory). We never use it in real life.
- `su - <USERNAME>` → Switches user **and loads that user’s full login environment** (like a fresh login). It changes HOME, PATH, shell settings, moves you to that user’s home directory. We always use it in real life.

---

## **Privileged and Unprivileged Users**

In Linux, a privileged user strictly means the root account (UID 0), because only UID 0 bypasses all permission checks and has unrestricted control over the entire system. Every other account, regardless of group membership or special permissions, is technically an unprivileged user. 
Some unprivileged users (**admins**) may be granted the ability to execute specific commands with elevated rights using tools like `sudo`, but they are not root themselves; they simply perform certain actions with temporary root privileges. Without elevation, they remain limited by standard permission rules. So in kernel-level terms, privilege is binary: either you are UID 0 with full inherent power, or you are not and are subject to permission controls.

---

## **How to make any user admin?**

##### **Admins and `sudo`**

Making any user admin is giving him some permissions. So they can perform certain actions as a root with the usage of `sudo`. When `sudo` is typed, it requires the user's password. 
If any user who is not specified as admin tries to use `sudo`, this is reported as an incident and logged.
There are three main ways to make anyone **admin**. We need to add this user any of these files:
- `/etc/sudoers`
- `/etc/sudoers.d`
- `wheel`

##### `/etc/sudoers` file

We can make any user admin by adding him to `/etc/sudoers` file. We open the file and find the line of `root ALL=(ALL)  ALL`. We can add our users after this line. 

```bash
mr-ravan ALL=(ALL)  ALL
```

- **mr-ravan** → the user this rule applies to
- **ALL (first one)** → from all hosts (important for multiserver environments)
- **(ALL)** → may run a command as any user (with `sudo`)
- ***NOPASSWD*** → *don’t ask for a password (optional). Syntax as `NOPASSWD: ALL`*
- **ALL (last one)** → may run any command

*Among these **ALL** options we change only the last one.*


> [!Warning] Warning
> Although we can add a user to `/etc/sudoers` to make him admin, it is generally not recommended. Because the mistake we make here can affect full config file. Even the syntax mistake in one user's permissions can break all permissions of others. Thus it is not recommended to use this file to make users admin.
> 
> Instead we use `/etc/sudoers.d` directory.

##### `/etc/sudoers.d` directory

  To give admin permissions to any user, we can `cd` to `/etc/sudoers.d` directory and create files here. Each file is for one user and file names should be the same with its user's name.
  
  Inside the file we write the same syntax as `/etc/sudoers`:

```bash
mr-ravan ALL=(ALL)  ALL
```

Meanings of partitions are the same with beforehand.

This way is more safe and recommended.



##### **`wheel` Group**

`wheel` is a **special group** used to control who is allowed to use `sudo` (become root). It is just a normal Linux group — nothing magical in the kernel.  Its power comes from how it is referenced inside `/etc/sudoers`. We need to add users to this group (as a secondary group) to make them admin.


> [!Warning] `wheel` Group Permissions
> This method to make admin all users is for all permissions. It does not restrict any permission (command). All commands can be performed on behalf of `root`.
> 
> To add a user to this group:
> ```bash
> usermod -aG wheel <USERNAME>
> ```
> Here `usermod` make changes on user settings (like its secondary group), `-G` refers the secondary group, `-a` makes sure not to exit user from other secondary groups.

##### **Limited Permissions**

In the previous examples in both `/etc/sudoers` and `/etc/sudoers.d`, we gave full permissions to admin users. However in real case, mostly we do not provide them with full permissions, just some. **Giving some permissions to a user means letting him to run some commands as a root**.
To be able to do it we need to replace the last `ALL` part with given permissions (commands).

First we need to determine the path of the command using `which command`.
Then instead of `ALL`, we need to add the paths:

```bash
mr-ravan ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/touch, /usr/sbin/useradd, /usr/sbin/userdel
```

Here, for the specified user, `/usr/bin/touch`, `/usr/sbin/useradd`, `/usr/sbin/userdel` commands are allowed to use on behalf of root without entering password.


> [!Warning] Blocking Some Commands
> I have shown how to give permission to run some command to a user. However there is another way where we actually block some commands, so the others can be run by a user.
> 
> We just need to write this:
> ```bash
> mr-ravan ALL=(ALL) ALL, !/usr/bin/touch, !/usr/sbin/userdel
> ```
> So here all commands are allowed to a user except these two commands. But this is **not secure** in practice. Why? Because users can bypass it (for example, using editors, scripts, different paths, symlinks, etc.). Blacklists are weak. Whitelists are strong.

> [!Info] Alias for Permissions
> Both in `/etc/sudoers` and `/etc/sudoers.d`, we can use *alias* for the commands. Imagine there some count of commands which are used multiple users. We set *alias* for the list of commands and use it each time.
> 
> It has specific sytax to create an alias:
> `Cmnd_Alias NETWORKING = /sbin/route, /sbin/ifconfig, /bin/ping, /sbin/dhclient`
> 
> Then we can use it for users:
> ```bash
> mr-ravan ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: NETWORKING
> ehmed ALL=(ALL) NETWORKING
> ```

## **How to delete a user?**

To be able to delete any user from the sytem, we have a command: `userdel`. 
It removes user itself, however keeps his home directory. So, we should also remove his directory manually:

```bash
userdel <USERNAME>
rm -rf /home/<USERNAME>
```

However there is an option of `userdel` which removes user with his home directory:

```bash
userdel -r <USERNAME>
```

