#users #files

## **What are user and password files?**

There are two important files in the system, which save detailed information about users and their passwords:
- `/etc/passwd` - Detailed user info (except password)
- `/etc/shadow` - Passwords of users and its settings

----

## **`/etc/passwd`**

`/etc/passwd` is a system file that stores **basic information about all users** on the system. It does **not** store passwords anymore. Each line represents one user and has **7 fields** separated by `:`.

Example:

```bash
mr_ravan:x:1001:1001:Mr Ravan:/home/mr_ravan:/bin/bash
```

- **Username**
- **Password Placeholder**
- **User Id (UID)**
- **Primary Group Id (GID)**
- **Comment about user**
- **User's home directory**
- **User's login shell**

Important points:

- UID 0 = root
- UIDs < 1000 usually = system/service accounts (on RHEL)
- UIDs ≥ 1000 usually = regular users


> [!info] Not-Interactive Shell
> A **non-interactive shell** is a shell session that runs commands **without user interaction**. It does not wait for you to type commands, it does not show a prompt, and it usually does not load full interactive settings like `.bashrc`. 
> It is actually used when the commands are executed.
> 
> We can make any user have a non-login shell:
> ```bash
> usermod -s /sbin/nologin <USERNAME>
> ```

---

## `/etc/shadow`

`/etc/shadow` is the file where Linux stores **encrypted user passwords and password aging information**. It is readable only by root because it contains sensitive data.

There are **9 lines**. Each line represents one user and looks like this:
```bash
username:encrypted_password:last_change:min:max:warn:inactive:expire:reserved
```

Fields:
- **Username**
- **Encrypted Password**
- **Last Change Date**
- **Min days before password can be changed**
- **Max days password is valid**
- **Days before expiration to warn user**
- **Password Expiry**
- **Account Expiry**
- **Not used part**

## **Password Management**

There are two commands to change user's password properties: `chage` and `passwd`.

```bash
passwd -n 3 -x 90 -w 7 <USERNAME>
```

The command above sets the password for user a min usage period of 3 days, expiry after 90 days where a warning is generated 7 days before expiration.

Many of options possible to do with `passwd` can be done using `chage`, too.

```bash
chage -E 2027-12-31 <USERNAME>
```

This command sets the expiration time for **user's account** to specific date. When the date is set as just `0`, user's account will be locked.

To the current password management settings:

```bash
chage -l <USERNAME>
```