#users #files

## **Where is user default settings saved?**

When we create a user using `useradd` [[01. User Management|command]], there are some settings that are set by default. It might be his home directory, shell and more info.

We can also modify these settings from the corresponding config file. It is `/etc/default/useradd` file.

---

## **Contents of the `/etc/default/useradd`**

By default it has 7 fields:

```
# useradd defaults file
GROUP=100
HOME=/home
INACTIVE=-1
EXPIRE=
SHELL=/bin/bash
SKEL=/etc/skel
CREATE_MAIL_SPOOL=yes
```

- **GROUP** is a default primary group for users. Normally, whenever a user is created, a new primary group with his username is also created and the user is added to the group. However we can update this setting, so when a user is created, a new primary group would not be created for him. There is a case: ***All users need to have a primary group***. In that case, this user is added to default primary group which is called `users` with group id `100`.
- **HOME** is basically home directory place. *Rather than root user, all users' home directory are located in /home directory by default*. Here we can modify it, however it is useless and bad practise.
- **INACTIVE** refers whether a user account is active or inactive. `-1` means never disable automatically.
- **EXPIRE** is an account expiration date. Empty means no expiration.
- **SHELL** is users' default shell.
- **SKEL** is a skeleton directory. Files inside `/etc/skel` are copied into the new user's home (like `.bashrc`, `.bash_profile`). We can create a motivation file for new users here.
- **CREATE_MAIL_SPOOL** When it is `yes`, system creates `/var/spool/mail/username` automatically. (useless)


---

## **Create With Custom Settings**

We can create a user with custom settings without letting them setting as default.

```bash
useradd -u <CUSTOM_UID> -g <PRIMARY_GROUP_NAME> -G <SECONDARY_GROUP_NAME> -s /bin/bash -c "Comment for the current user" <USERNAME>
```

There are more options to make settings custom. We do not need to learn all by heart, just using `--help` is enough to see all: `useradd --help`.

- `<CUSTOM_UID>` is custom user id. It should be unique. It is recommended to select it from between 1000 and 60000.

