#installation #configuration
 
## **Introduction**

To practise **Red Hat**, we need to use virtualization tools and open **Linux** there. The tool we use is **VMware Workstation Pro**.
First, we need to download it. 

---
## **Download iso file**

Then we need iso file of **Red Hat 9.7**. To download it we go [This Website](https://developers.redhat.com/), sign up/log in and from **Downloads** select *DVD iso (x86_64)* under the *Red Hat Enterprise Linux 9.7*.

----

## **To create virtual machine in VMware**

We open **VMware Workstation Pro** and go **Home** tab, select **Create a New Virtual Machine**.

1. It is good to choose **Custom (Advanced)** Configuration Type.
2. We may select iso image from this early steps or later too.
3. We need to choose Linux as *Guest OS*.
4. We should name our VM meaningful, understandable enough.
5. Then select processors and cors in each processors. (Default is good)
6. We choose RAM. (2 GB is good)
7. Do not change NAT or SCSI Controller or NVMe.
8. We create a new virtual disk.
9. For max disk size, we can choose 10 GB and that is good to select **Store virtual disk as a signle file**.
10. Then we can click **Finish**. If we did not select iso file in early stages, we can choose it right now by clicking `Customize Hardware > New CD/DVD (SATA)`. In this page click `Use ISO image file`, then browse and find it.

---
## **Install OS to VM**

1. Start Vm. From the first page click `Install RHEL 9.7`.
2. Then select language and continue.
3. We will settings page with important options. 
4. We must make sure whether `Time&Data` is selected correctly. 
5. From `Installation Destination`, we can config disk size staff like swap memory.
6. From `Software Selection` section, it is good to choose `Minimal Install` and necessary packages.
7. From `Root Password` section, we should set secure root password and make sure to click `Allow root SSH login with password`. This option helps us to connect linux terminal via SSH.
8. From `Create User` section, we can create a new user by providing username and password for him.
9. Click `Begin Installation`.
10. After some time and reboot, it will require our username and password. (We may write whether custom user's credentials or root).

---

## **Connecting terminal via SSH**

After this process, we can work in terminal of RHEL, however we may confront with some problems. For example, we cannot paste copied text or upload files from *host OS* to *guest OS*. 
Thus there are some tools for windows to download and connect via ssh to the linux terminal and control it from here. One of the best tools for the purpose is `MobaXterm`. 

We open a terminal session here. Before connection, we need to know ip of linux terminal. That is why in linux terminal we write this command: `ip a`.
From the output, we look at the part coming after `inet` and keep in mind this ip address.

In `MobaXterm` terminal, we write `ssh username@ip_address`.

