#vi #text-editor 

## **What is Vi?**

It is a text editor used in Unix and Linux a lot. It has a modal interface. There are three mods:

- Command Mode
- Insert Mode
- Last Line Mode

We always use one of these modes.

---
## **Modes**
##### **Command Mode**

There are some commands used in command mode which are very useful.

- `/PATTERN` - `/` is used here to find patterns, starts after the cursor.
- `?PATTERN` - `/` is used here to find patterns, start before the cursor.
-  `n` - **Repeat the last search in the same direction.**
    - If you did `/hello`, pressing `n` moves to the **next occurrence downward**.
    - If you did `?hello`, pressing `n` moves **upward** (same direction as `?`).
- `N` - **Repeat the last search in the opposite direction.**
    - If you searched `/hello`, pressing `N` moves **upward**.
    - If you searched `?hello`, pressing `N` moves **downward**.
- `yy` - Copies the **entire current line**.
	- `3yy` - Copies 3 lines starting from the cursor.
- `dd` - Cuts (by copying) the **entire current line**.
	- `3yy` - Cuts 3 lines starting from the cursor.
- `p` - Pasted the content after the cursor.
- `u` - **Undo the most recent change**. Like Ctrl+Z in other editors.
- `i` - Switch us to insert mode.

##### **Insert Mode**

In the **Command Mode**, we need to press `i` to switch to **Insert Mode**. In this mode, we can write, modify and make changes on written text. To exit the mode, we need to press `Esc`.

##### **Last Line Mode**

In the **Command Mode**, we need to write `:` to switch to **Last Line Mode**. Mostly it is used to save changes or quit from the file.

- `:w` - Saves file.
- `:wq` - Saves file and quits.
- `:q` - Just quits the file.
- `:q!` - Quits without saving changes.
- `:%s/<pattern1>/<pattern2>` - Finds the first occurrence of `<pattern1>` in each line and replace it with `<pattern2>`. If we add `/g` and type `:%s/<pattern1>/<pattern2>/g`, it will change all occurrences.

After writing any one, we just need to press `Enter`.

---

## **Editing in vim**

`Vim` is a newer and better version of `vi`, so it has more features. It supports more than 200 syntaxes. For each sytax it has a different style.

##### **Multiple Lines**
It is possible to edit multiple files in `vim` at the same time. We just need to write:
`vim <file1> <file2> <file3>`

When it opens, we only see the first file. To be able to see, other files we need to switch to **last line** mode and write `:args`.
The files will be listed. We can switch among files here using `:next` and `:prev`. 
If we want to save automatically before switching another file, we need to write them like `:wnext` and `wprev`.

##### **Undo and Redo**

If we want to revert changes (basically Ctrl+Z), we need to switch to command mode and type `:undo`. After undo, if we again want to bring back the changes (basically Ctrl+Y), we need to type `:redo`.
