#archive #compress #commands 

## **What is Archiving and Compressing?**

File archiving in Linux is the process of combining multiple files and directories into a single file, known as an archive or "tarball" (`.tar`), to facilitate easier storage, backup, and transfer. It preserves file permissions and directory structures without reducing file size.

File compression in Linux is the process of reducing file sizes using **lossless compression algorithms** to conserve disk space and speed up file transfers. It is typically managed through powerful command-line utilities such as `gzip`, `bzip2`, and `xz`, which often work in conjunction with the `tar` command for archiving multiple files into a single bundle.

Compression commands can be used for single file without needing archiving(`.tar`), however for multiple files and directories we should use archiving before.

---

## **Archiving**

```bash
tar -cvf archive.tar file*
```

It archieves all files starting with `file` and archives them as `archieve.tar`. 
Here, `-c` creates a new archive, `-v` is verbose and shows files after archive, `-f` specifies the archive filename.

We almost always use `-f` flag in `tar` for archiving and compressing.

---

## **Compressing**

#### `gzip`

It is a compression type which is very command and fast, but compresses less. Its option is `-z` with the usage of `tar` command.

```bash
tar -czvf comp.tar.gz file*
```

It arcives and compresses using `gzip` files starting with `file` as `comp.tar.gz`.

#### `bzip2`

It is a compression type which provides better, but slower compression than `gzip`. This is less command, but still valid, used for in case space is more important than speed. Its option is `-j` with the usage of `tar` command.

```bash
tar -cjvf comp.tar.bz2 file*
```

It arcives and compresses using `bzip2` files starting with `file` as `comp.tar.bz2`.

----

## **Extracting**

To be able to extract archived or extracted files we need to change `-c` (create) option with `-x` (extract) option.

```bash
tar -xvf arc.tar #It extracts archive to the current directory.
tar -xzvf comp.tar.gz #It extracts compression (with gzip) to the current directory.
tar -xjvf comp.tar.bz2 #It extracts compressions (with bzip2) to the current directory.
```

If we want to extract files to a specific directory, we need to add `-C` option and the directory name:

```bash
tar -xjvf comp.tar.gz -C dest/
#It extracts compression (with gzip) to the dest/ folder.
```