#permissions #commands #advance
## **Intro to Access List**

An access list in Linux usually means an **Access Control List (ACL)**. It is an advanced permission system that gives more flexible control than the normal owner–group–others model. It may give permissions to users or groups for files and directories.

Normally, a file has only:

- one owner
- one group
- permissions for others

That’s it. If you want to give special access to one extra user without changing the main group, the [[01. Introduction to Permissions|traditional permission system]] cannot do it cleanly.

ACL solves this.

With ACL, you can say:  
- “User A has rw-”  
- “User B has r--”  
- “Group dev has rw-”  

All on the same file — without changing the main owner/group structure.

---

## **Commands**

#### **`setfacl -m <u/g>:<GROUPNAME/USERNAME>:<PERMISSIONS> <FILENAME>`**

```bash
setfacl -m u:userB:rw file
```

This gives userB read and write permission on that file (or directory), even if userB is not the owner and not in the file’s group. If we want to remove any permission from the user in access list, we can just use `-` for this permission like `u:userB:rw-`.

#### **`getfacl <FILENAME>`**

```bash
getfacl <FILENAME>
```

It helps us to see access list of the given file or directory.

#### **`setfacl -m -R <u/g>:<GROUPNAME/USERNAME>:<PERMISSIONS> <DIRECTORTYNAME>`**

```bash
setfacl -m -R u:userB:rwX folder
```

It helps us to give permission to a directory with all files/directories inside it. In this case using `X` ([[03. Changing Permissions Under Directory|capital]] `X`) is better to ignore giving **execute** permission to regular files.

However, when we use this command, it does apply this rule the files/directories which have been added before the command. If we run this command, the files inside the directory are affected, however the incoming files are not affected.

##### **`setfacl -R -m d:<u/g>:<GROUPNAME/USERNAME>:<PERMISSIONS> <DIRECTORTYNAME>`**

As I mentioned above, `setfacl -m -R <u/g>:<GROUPNAME/USERNAME>:<PERMISSIONS> <DIRECTORTYNAME>` command cannot affect incoming files. However, if we add `d:` to this command, the rule will be applied to incoming files, too.

In real case, we need to run both commands. The first is applied to existing ones, the second to incoming ones.

---
## **Access List and Normal Permissions**

> [!Warning] ACL and Normal Permissions
> Important: ACL does not replace normal permissions. It extends them. The basic permissions still exist, and ACL entries are applied on top of them (with a “mask” controlling the maximum allowed).
> 
> In real systems, ACL is used when:
> - Multiple teams need controlled shared access 
> - You don’t want to create too many groups
> - You don’t want to create too many groups



