#ntp #time 
### **Package**

We need to install `crony` package:

```bash
yum install chrony -y
```

After downloading the package, we need to look at its [[03. Systemd Services|service]] and ensure it is running and enabled.

---
### **Service Up**

```bash
systemctl enable --now chronyd
systemctl status chronyd
```

----
## **Firewall Ensurement**

Then we need to add this port to [[04. Firewall|firewall]]:

```bash
firewall-cmd --add-service=ntp
firewall-cmd --permanent --add-service=ntp 
```


> [!Info] SELinux
> We do not need to add chronyd port to [[03. SELinux Context and Label|SELinux]]. Chrony is a well-known, standard service, so SELinux already has a built-in policy that allows it to operate normally — including binding to port 123. You don't need to write custom rules or change anything.

---
### **Server and Client Sides**

There are two sides when we talk about ntp config: Client and Server.

- **Server Side** - Shared time
- **Client Side** - Takes time from **Server**

#### Config File

Our config file for `ntp` is `/etc/chrony.conf`.

Actually each server side takes the time from another place. So, we always (in server and client sides) define the place where our VM takes time from.
That is the first line. If we take it from pool (it is given as name), we write like that:
`pool 2.rhel.pool.ntp.org iburst`.
If we take it from server (it is given as ip), we write it like that:
`server 192.168.88.160 iburst`.

> [!Important] Never Forget
> We never forget to add `iburst` to end of the first line. It does not matter if we are in server or client side.

#### Commands

We need to run this command to enable `ntp` protocol:

```bash
timedatectl set-ntp true
```

Then we should restart the service:

```bash
systemctl restart chronyd
```

#### Client Side Checking

We need to check whether our VM take time successfully or not. We use this command to check it:

```bash
chronyc sources
```

It displays that kind of result:

```
MS Name/IP address         Stratum Poll Reach LastRx Last sample
===============================================================================
^* 91.234.235.13                 2   7   377    81   +299us[ +405us] +/-   29ms
```

If there is `*` after `^`, that means everyhting works perfectly. Otherwise, if there is another character after `^` like `?`, there might be something wrong. 
However, sometimes it takes some time `ntp` to work. So, we need to wait some minutes and check again.


> [!info] Allow IP
> In Server part we should uncomment (or add) the lines to allow clients to use this server as ntp.
> For that we need to make sure this line is uncommented: `allow 192.168.0.0/16`.
