#network #theory #commands 

## **What is Gateway?**

**A gateway** is like a door to outside world. If our computer want to talk **IP Addresses outside our local network**, it sends traffic to the **gateway**. A machine can send packages to another machine which is the same network without gateway. However, when a machine wants to send traffic to outside network, it requires **gateway**.

Your VM IP: `192.168.88.11`  
Gateway: `192.168.88.1`

- If you ping another machine in the same network (`192.168.88.50`) → your computer can reach it **directly**.
- If you ping google.com (`142.250.x.x`) → your computer **doesn’t know where it is** → sends traffic to **gateway 192.168.88.1**, which then routes it to the internet.

Changing gateways is possible using [[09. Usage of nmtui|nmtui]] or [[11. Usage of nmcli|nmcli]]. Changing gateway is basically changing route.

---

## **What is Route?**

A **route** is a rule in the system that says **"If you want to reach this network, you should send the packets through that gateway or interface."**

So,
- **Gateway** → a device (router) you send traffic to if the destination is outside your network.
- **Route** → a system rule that tells your computer which gateway or interface to use to reach a network.

----

## **Commands**

##### Show Routes

We have `ip route` or `ip route show` command which shows all used routes in the systems. Here all gateways are also specified.

```bash
ip route
```

Example output:

```bash
default via 192.168.88.2 dev ens160 proto dhcp src 192.168.88.129 metric 102
192.168.88.0/24 dev ens160 proto kernel scope link src 192.168.88.129 metric 102
```

- ***First Line:***
	- It includes **gateway/router** ip which is `192.168.88.2`.
	- `proto dhcp` or `proto static` means whether the private ip of this adapter is given manually or by [[08. DHCP and DORA|dhcp]].
	- **src 192.168.88.129** is used as our **source IP** when sending packets.
	- Summary: “For everything outside my network, send packets through `192.168.88.2` using `ens160`.”
- ***Second Line:***
	- `192.168.88.0/24` is our **local network**.
	- `scope link` shows it is **directly reachable**, no gateway needed.
	-  Summary: “For anything inside my local network `192.168.88.*`, just use `ens160` directly, no gateway needed.”

##### Add or Delete Routes

```bash
ip route add <EXTERNAL_IP> via <GATEWAY_IP>
ip route delete <EXTERNAL_IP> via <GATEWAY_IP>
```

