#fstab #theory #advance

The syntax of `fstab` file is something like that:

```
UUID=87c1f617-80eb-4b5d-9570-38d6087f55e7    /data    xfs   defaults   0 0
/dev/nvme0n3p1        /oracle    ext4   defaults 0 0
/dev/vg01/lv01        /db_data    xfs   defaults 0 0
```

There are 6 fields:

- **Field 1 — Device:** what you're mounting. Can be device/LVM path, UUID (`UUID=xxxx`). It is better to use UUID. To find UUID, we need to use `blkid <PATH>`.
- **Field 2 — Mount point:** where it gets mounted, like `/data` or `/home`.
- **Field 3 — [[04. Filesystem|Filesystem]] type:** `xfs`, `ext4`, `swap`, `nfs` etc.
- **Field 4 — Options:** `defaults` covers most cases (read-write, auto-mount at boot).  We use `findmnt` command to see all possible options. Common ones:
	- `ro` - for read-only
	- `noauto` - to skip boot mounting.
	- `_netdev` - not to mount if there is no network
- **Field 5 — Dump:** almost always `0`. Old backup tool, ignore it in modern systems. It allows or denies whether we can take backup of data or not.
- **Field 6 — Pass:** filesystem check order at boot. `0` means skip, `1` is for root partition, `2` for everything else. On XFS just use `0` because `fsck` doesn't apply to XFS.

---

## **Specific One**

If we need to use our [[03. Configuration of Package Manager (DNF)|local packages]] (`BaseOS` and `AppStream`), we need to mount the specific [[01. Introduction to Disk|disk]], too. [[05. Mounting|Mountpoint]] is mostly `/mnt`.

Our disk is: `/dev/sr0`.

We write it in `fstab` like that:

```
/dev/sr0     /mnt     iso9660     defaults   0 0
```

As you can see, I mention its filesystem differently which is `iso9660` that is specific to that disk. If we forget it, we can use this command to remember:
```bash
blkid /dev/sr0
#It show the filesystem in Type section of the output.
```

We can also write its UUID instead of Path.
