#kernel #theory #introduction 

## **What is Linux Kernel?**

[[01. Introduction to Linux|The Linux kernel]] is the heart of the operating system. It is the layer between the user who works with Linux from a shell environment and the hardware that is available in the computer on which the user is working. The kernel manages the I/O instructions it receives from the software and translates them into the processing instructions that are executed by the central processing unit and other hardware in the computer. The kernel also takes care of handling essential operating system tasks. One example of such a task is the scheduler that makes sure any processes that are started on the operating system are handled by the CPU.

---
## **Kernel Threads ([[01. Introduction to Process|Processes]])**

The operating system tasks that are performed by the kernel are implemented by different kernel threads. Kernel threads are easily recognized with a command like `ps aux`. We have talked about that kind of commands when we talked about [[03. ps Command|processes]].

---
## **Drivers**

Another important task of the Linux kernel is hardware initialization. To make sure that this hardware can be used, the Linux kernel uses drivers. Every piece of hardware contains specific features, and to use these features, a driver must be loaded. The Linux kernel is modular, and drivers are loaded as kernel modules. (Kernel is divided to modules (drivers)).

---
## **Commands**

#### Kernel-Specific

We have a command to get information about our current kernel:

```bash
uname -a
```

To help analyze what the kernel is doing, the Linux operating systems provide that tool:

```bash
dmesg #For Kernel Logs
```

We have anohter command about kernel logs:

```bash
journalctl --dmesg
```

#### Driver-Specific

Lists currently loaded kernel modules:
```bash
lsmod
```

Displays information about kernel modules:
```bash
modinfo <MODULE_NAME>
```

Loads (downloads) kernel modules, including all of their dependencies:
```bash
modprobe <MODULE_NAME>
```

Unloads (removes) kernel modules, considering kernel module dependencies:
```bash
modprobe -r <MODULE_NAME>
```

