%% Begin Waypoint %%
- **01. Basics**
	- [[01. Introduction to Linux]]
	- [[02. Introduction to Red Hat]]
	- [[03. Introduction to Red Hat Certificates]]
	- [[04. Installation and configuration of Red Hat 9.7]]
	- [[05. Shell and its varieties]]
	- [[06. Basic Commands in Linux Terminal]]
	- [[07. Alias and Unalias Commands]]
	- [[08. Regular Expressions (Regex) and grep Command]]
	- [[09. Wildcards]]
	- [[10. Find Command]]
	- [[11. Important Directories in Linux]]
	- [[11. Vi - Text Editor]]
	- [[12. Control Operators]]
	- [[13. Archiving and Compressing]]
- **02. Environment variables and Redirections**
	- [[01. Redirections]]
	- [[02. Command History]]
	- [[03. Quotes in Linux]]
	- [[04. Internal and External Commands]]
	- [[05. PATH variable]]
	- [[06. Exit Code]]
	- [[07. Inode, Hard Link and Soft Link]]
- **03. User and Group Management**
	- [[01. User Management]]
	- [[02. Users and Passwords Files]]
	- [[03. Group Management]]
	- [[04. User Default Settings]]
	- [[05. User Configuration File]]
	- [[06. Bash Config Files]]
- **04. Permissions Management**
	- [[01. Introduction to Permissions]]
	- [[02. Changing Permissions, Owners and Groups]]
	- [[03. Changing Permissions Under Directory]]
	- [[04. Changing Permissions With Numbers]]
	- [[05. UMask Command]]
	- [[06. Access List]]
- **05. Advanced Permissions**
	- [[01. SUID]]
	- [[02. SGID]]
	- [[03. Sticky Bit]]
	- [[04. Attributes]]
- **06. Package Management**
	- [[01. Introduction to Package Management]]
	- [[02. Lsblk, Mounting and Mountpoint]]
	- [[03. Configuration of Package Manager (DNF)]]
	- [[04. YUM Methods]]
	- [[05. YUM Mehtods For Software Groups]]
	- [[06. Subscription]]
- **07. Network**
	- [[01. IP Address and Its Variations]]
	- [[02. NAT and Its Variations]]
	- [[03. MAC Address]]
	- [[04. Protocols and Ports]]
	- [[05. DNS]]
	- [[06. TCP and UDP]]
	- [[07. OSI Layers]]
	- [[08. DHCP and DORA]]
	- [[09. Usage of nmtui]]
	- [[10. Adding A New Adapter in RHEL 10.1]]
	- [[11. Usage of nmcli]]
	- [[12. Gateway and Route]]
- **08. Process**
	- [[01. Introduction to Process]]
	- [[02. Parent, Child and Orphan Processes]]
	- [[03. ps Command]]
	- [[04. top and htop Commands]]
	- [[05. Priority Of Process and Nice Value]]
	- [[06. Process States]]
	- [[07. Killing Process]]
- **09. Crontab**
	- [[01. Introduction to Crontab]]
	- [[02. Crontab Command]]
	- [[03. Deny User To Create Crontab]]
	- [[04. Smallest Unit In Crontab]]
	- [[05. atd Command]]
- **10. Disk and Partitions**
	- [[01. Introduction to Disk]]
	- [[02. Partitioning and Its Types]]
	- [[03. fdisk and gdisk]]
	- [[04. Filesystem]]
	- [[05. Mounting]]
	- [[06. Adding swap memory]]
	- [[07. Problem in Partitions]]
- **11. VG and LVMs**
	- [[01. Introduction to Volume Group and Logical Volume Management]]
	- [[02. Physical Volumes]]
	- [[03. Volume Group]]
	- [[04. Physical Extend]]
	- [[05. Logical Volume Management]]
	- [[06. Filesystem and Mounting]]
	- [[07. Extending and Shrinking LV]]
	- [[08. Extending and Shrinking VG]]
	- [[09. Removing LV and VG and PV]]
	- [[10. Swap Memory With LV]]
- **12. Stratis & VDO**
	- [[01. Introduction to Stratis]]
	- [[02. Stratis Commands]]
	- [[03. Introduction to VDO]]
	- [[04. VDO Commands]]
- **13. fstab**
	- [[01. Introduction to fstab file]]
	- [[02. Syntax of fstab file]]
	- [[03. Crash in fstab and Debug]]
- **14. Systemd**
	- [[01. Introduction to Daemons and Systemd]]
	- [[02. Units]]
	- [[03. Systemd Services]]
	- [[04. Systemd Sockets]]
	- [[05. Systemd Targets]]
	- [[06. Systemd Timers]]
	- [[07. Systemctl Command]]
	- [[08. Service and Timer Config]]
	- [[09. Target Types]]
- **15. Boot Process**
	- [[01. Introduction to Boot Process in Linux]]
	- [[02. Resetting Root Password]]
- **16. Kernel and SSH**
	- [[01. Kernel Basics]]
	- [[02. Configuring SSH]]
- **17. Logging**
	- [[01. Introduction to Logging]]
	- [[02. Logging Approaches and Destinations]]
	- [[03. rsyslogd Configuration and QRadar]]
	- [[04. Log Rotation]]
	- [[05. Journald and Journalctl Command]]
	- [[06. Logging in newer versions of RHEL]]
- **18. Bash Scripting**
	- [[01. Introduction to Bash Scripting]]
	- [[02. Basic Syntax of Bash Scripting]]
	- [[02. Test Flags]]
	- [[03. Loops in Bash]]
	- [[04. Positional Parameters]]
- **19. Apache, Firewall**
	- [[01. Introduction to Web and Application Servers]]
	- [[02. Apache]]
	- [[03. Virtual Hosts]]
	- [[04. Firewall]]
	- [[05. Firewall Config]]
- **20. SELinux**
	- [[01. Introduction to SELinux]]
	- [[02. SELinux Core Elements]]
	- [[03. SELinux Context and Label]]
- **21. NTP**
	- [[01. Introduction to NTP]]
	- [[02. Commands for Time]]
	- [[03. Chrony Setup]]
- **22. NFS, Samba, AutoFs**
	- [[01. NFS]]
	- [[02. Samba]]
	- [[03. AutoFs]]
- **23. Tuned ADM**
	- [[Tuned-adm]]
- **24. Flatpak**
	- [[Flatpak]]
- **25. Container**
	- [[01. Introduction to Containers]]
	- [[02. Podman Config]]
	- [[03. Creating Image]]
	- [[04. Running Containers as Systemd Services]]
- [[Check list]]
- [[Exam Practise]]
- [[Questions]]

%% End Waypoint %%
