#introduction #process #theory #commands

## **What is Process?**

A **process** is simply a program that is currently running in memory. When we execute a command like `ls` or `bash`, the kernel loads it to RAM, assigns it a unique ID called **PID**, and starts executing. That running instance is called **process**. Everything happened on a Linux server, a process is started.

When a process is started, it can use multiple **threads**. A **thread** is a smaller unit of execution that lives _inside_ a process and a task started by process. The Linux shell does not offer tools to manage
individual threads. Thread management should be taken care of from within the command.

```bash
sleep 10
#Shell sleeps 10 seconds
```

---
## **Types of Processes**

There are main types of Process: Shell Jobs, Deamons, Kernel Threads.

#### Shell Jobs

Shell jobs are processes that our shell is actively tracking. When you run something in your terminal, the shell calls it a "job" and gives it a job number. We have an access to manipulate shell jobs.

#### Deamons

`systemd` manages services and these services run as daemons. (`systemd` runs services as daemons). Deamons are processes that provide services. They normally are started when a computer is booted and often (not always) run with root privilages. We have an access to manipulate deamons.

#### Kernel Threads

Kernel threads are a part of [[01. Introduction to Linux|Linux kernel]]. We cannot managem them using any tool. However, for monitoring of the system, it is important to keep an eye on them. The greatest deamon in the system is `systemd` and ID is `1`. 

---
## **Where Processes Are Saved?**

Our processes and the details about them are saved in `/proc/` directory. Each process is shown with its PID as a directory here. If PID of our process is `1709`. We need to go `/proc/1709/` directory. Inside it there is a specific file called `cmdline`. If we run `cat cmdline`, it will show us which command was used to start the process. 

To get PID of the process we started, we use this command:

```bash
pidof sleep
#We write the name of command which started the process
```

---
## **Location of Processes**

There are two locations where processes are run: **Foreground** and **Background**.

#### Foreground Processes

**Foreground processes** run interactively — they're tied to your terminal and you have to wait for them to finish. Running `ping google.com` without anything extra is a foreground process.
#### Background Processes

**Background processes** run detached from your terminal input, so you can keep using the shell while they work. You send a process to the background by adding `&` at the end, like `ping google.com &`.

We have a `jobs` command to see the list of (background) processes that **our current shell session** is tracking.  `jobs` command shows us sequence of processes. 

To bring any process to foreground we use `fg <SEQUENCE_NUMBER>` and this number is seen when we run `jobs`. To take any process to background we use `bg <SEQUENCE_NUMBER>`.

----

## **Stop and Kill Any Process; EOF**

- If we want to stop any process, we need to bring it to foreground and then press `Ctrl+Z`. To restart the process, we run either `fg <SEQUENCE_NUM>` or `bg <SEQUENCE_NUM>` depending on whether we want it to run in foreground or background.
- If we want to kill any process, we need to bring it to background and then press `Ctrl+C`.
- `Ctrl+D` sends an **EOF (End of File)** signal to the terminal. It tells the shell "there's no more input coming." In practice this means — if you're in an interactive session like `bash`, `python`, or `mysql`, it **closes/exits** that session cleanly. If you press it in your main terminal, it logs you out or closes the terminal. Example: If we run `cat` command without any argument, it will not stop and wait for an input. If we press `Ctrl + D`, it says to `cat` that there is no input.