#systemd #units #services #timers 

## **Intro**

Sometimes we may need to use [[03. Systemd Services|service]] and [[06. Systemd Timers|timer]] together. In that case our service type is `oneshot` which refers it just works one time and stops its process. Our timer calls it periodically and service does its job periodically, too.

In RHCSA exam, that kind of questions might be asked.

---

## **Steps**

Let's create an [[01. Introduction to Permissions|executable]] file in `/usr/bin/exam.sh` which takes directory content (`ls`) of `/mnt` and [[01. Redirections|redirects]] it to `file.txt` located under `/root` directory. 

#### 1. So we need to write this in `exam.sh`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

ls /mnt > /root/file.txt
```

#### 2. Then we should make it an executable file using `chmod`:

```bash
chmod +x /usr/bin/exam.sh
```

#### 3. Create `exam.service` file under `/etc/systemd/system` directory

We create `exam.service` file:

```bash
touch /etc/systemd/system/exam.service
```

We do not need to learn all its fields by heart, we can just use `sshd.service` syntax and update it.
The path of the service is `/etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/sshd.service`.

So we can print its content:

```bash
cat /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/sshd.service
```

> [!Info] The Second Method
> In addition to copy and paste the contents, we can change the method a little bit. We can use `cp` command to copy `sshd.service` and change its name with `mv`.
> ```bash
> cd /etc/systemd/system
> cp ./multi-user.target.wants/sshd.service .
> mv ./sshd.service ./exam.service
> ```
> Then we can start to change its contents.

Then we need to copy its contents and paste them in `exam.service` file. We need to remove all unnecessary lines and change others for our purpose:

```service
[Unit]
Description=Service File For exam.sh

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/exam.sh

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

We can write any description we want, should specify `Type` as `oneshot` and write the path of our file in `ExecStart`. Moreover, we should not touch `WantedBy`.

#### 4. Create `exam.timer` file under `/etc/systemd/system` directory

Let's create `exam.timer` file:

```bash
touch /etc/systemd/system/exam.timer
```

We do not need to learn its fields by heart either. We can copy it from `dnf-makecache.timer` file.
Its path: `/etc/systemd/system/timers.target.wants/dnf-makecache.timer`.

So we can print its contents:

```bash
cat /etc/systemd/system/timers.target.wants/dnf-makecache.timer
```

> [!Info] The Second Method
> In addition to copy and paste the contents, we can change the method a little bit. We can use `cp` command to copy `dnf-makecache.timer` and change its name with `mv`.
> ```bash
> cd /etc/systemd/system
> cp ./timers.target.wants/dnf-makecache.timer .
> mv ./dnf-makecache.timer ./exam.timer
> ```
> Then we can start to change its contents.

Then we need to copy its contents and paste them in `exam.timer` file. We need to remove all unnecessary lines and change others for our purpose:

```
[Unit]
Description=Timer for Exam Service

[Timer]
OnBootSec=1min
OnUnitActiveSec=1m
Unit=exam.service

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
```

We can write any description we want. `OnBootSec` defines the starting time after the system boots. `OnUnitActiveSec` refers the intervals between calls after the call by `OnBootSec`. `Unit` should indicate our service file. We don't have to touch `WantedBy` field.


> [!Warning] Timer File
> After copy and paste the timer file, we need to be very careful. By default in that file there is `OnUnitInactiveSec` line, we need to change it to `OnUnitActiveSec`. (So, from `Inactive` to `Active`).

#### 5. We need to enable and start both the service and timer files

We need to use [[07. Systemctl Command|systemctl command]] to enable and start the service and timer files:

```bash
systemctl enable --now exam.service
systemctl enable --now exam.timer
# now helps to start file, too
```

