#logging #configuration #advance 

## **`rsyslogd`**

We have talked about `rsyslogd` [[02. Logging Approaches and Destinations|before]]. There is a file which is for configuration of this service. That is `/etc/rsyslog.conf` file. Moreover, there is a directory `/etc/rsyslog.d` for clean seperation. This directory is included in the main config file:
`include(file="/etc/rsyslog.d/*.conf" mode="optional")`

The config file of `rsyslogd` is for both local logs and logs from another machine in the network. It is for **accepting (receiving) logs from another machine**, not sending.

We can get logs from the network, we can use two protocols: [[06. TCP and UDP|TCP and UDP]]. 

There are this part in the file which configures it:

```

# Provides UDP syslog reception
# for parameters see http://www.rsyslog.com/doc/imudp.html
#module(load="imudp") # needs to be done just once
#input(type="imudp" port="514")

# Provides TCP syslog reception
# for parameters see http://www.rsyslog.com/doc/imtcp.html
#module(load="imtcp") # needs to be done just once
#input(type="imtcp" port="514")
```

If both TCP and UDP parts are commented, that refers there is no receiving logs via network. If we want to get logs with TCP, we open its comments. Otherwise, we open the comments of UDP.

---
## **Rules for `rsyslogd`**

To specify what information should be logged to which destination, rsyslogd uses facilities, priorities, and destinations:

- **A facility** specifies a category of information that is logged. Basically, it is the source of the logs.
- **A priority** is used to define the severity of the message that needs to be logged. When you specify a priority, by default all messages with that priority and all higher priorities are logged. 
- **A destination** defines where the message should be written. Mostly under the `/var/log/`.

There are some priorities:


| Priority       | Description                                                                                            |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| debug          | Debug messages for development that will give as much information as possible about service operation. |
| info           | Informational messages about normal service operation.                                                 |
| notice         | Informational messages about items that might become an issue later.                                   |
| warning (warn) | Something is suboptimal, but there is no real error yet.                                               |
| error (err)    | A noncritical error has occurred.                                                                      |
| crit           | A critical error has occurred.                                                                         |
| alert          | Message used when the availability of the<br>service is about to be discontinued.                      |
| emerg (panic)  | Message generated when the availability of the service is discontinued.                                |
When a specific priority is used, all messages with that priority and higher are logged according to the specifications used in that specific rule.


> [!Info] Custom Logging Facility
> **local0–local7** are custom logging facilities in syslog (used by **rsyslog**) that don’t have predefined meanings and are reserved for applications to use freely. They allow services or admins to tag logs into separate categories, like assigning different “channels” for different apps. This makes it possible to route logs from specific programs into separate files or forward them to systems like SIEM tools such as **IBM QRadar**, without mixing them with standard system logs.

---
## **Rules Example From the Main Config File**

(Comments are by the system)

```conf
#### RULES ####

# Log all kernel messages to the console.
# Logging much else clutters up the screen.
#kern.*                                                 /dev/console

# Log anything (except mail) of level info or higher.
# Don't log private authentication messages!
*.info;mail.none;authpriv.none;cron.none                /var/log/messages

# The authpriv file has restricted access.
authpriv.*                                              /var/log/secure

# Save boot messages also to boot.log
local7.*                                                /var/log/boot.log
```

If we try to analyze the rules here, we will see:

- `kern.*  /dev/console`
	- Facility → `kern` (kernel). 
	- Property → `*` (everything). 
	- Destination → `/dev/console`.
- `*.info;mail.none;authpriv.none;cron.none  /var/log/messages` 
	- Facility → `*` (everything except `mail`, `authpriv`, `cron`, because they are mentioned as `none`). 
	- Property → `info`. 
	- Destination → `/var/log/messages`.
- `authpriv.*  /var/log/secure`
	- Facility → `authpriv`.
	- Property → `*` (everything).
	- Destination → `/var/log/secure`.
- `local7.*  /var/log/boot.log`
	- Facility → `local7`.
	- Property → `*` (everything).
	- Destination → `/var/log/boot.log`.

---
## **QRadar**

**IBM QRadar** is a **SIEM system (Security Information and Event Management)**. In simple terms, it’s a central security brain that **collects logs from many machines, analyzes them, and detects suspicious activity**.

Think of it like this: instead of checking logs on each Linux server separately, QRadar gathers everything in one place and asks:

- “Is this login pattern normal?”
- “Is this IP attacking multiple servers?”
- “Is this behavior a security threat?”

It does this by receiving logs from systems like Linux, firewalls, web servers, and applications.


> [!Info] Sending Logs to QRadar
> Imagine, we want to send all logs to QRadar. We go `rsyslogd` config file and add this:
`*.*  @@192.168.1.50:514`.
   Here `@` means UDP, `@@` means TCP.



