#logging #advance 

## **Necessity of Log Rotation**

**Log rotation** is a system process that **manages log file size over time** so your disk doesn’t get filled with endless logs.

In Linux, [[01. Introduction to Logging|logs]] in `/var/log/` grow continuously. Without control, they would eventually consume all [[01. Introduction to Disk|disk]] space. Log rotation solves this by:

- **[[13. Archiving and Compressing|archiving]] old logs**
- **compressing them**
- **creating new fresh log files**
- **deleting very old logs if needed**

It prevents disk full issues, keeps logs manageable and readable, improves system stability, helps long-term log retention policies.

---

## **Configuration of Rotation**

The configuration of rotation is managed in `/etc/logrotate.conf` file or `/etc/logrotate.d/` directory (clean seperation).

```conf
# see "man logrotate" for details

# rotate log files weekly
weekly

# keep 4 weeks worth of backlogs
rotate 4

# create new (empty) log files after rotating old ones
create

# use date as a suffix of the rotated file
dateext

# uncomment this if you want your log files compressed
#compress

# packages drop log rotation information into this directory
include /etc/logrotate.d
```

- **Period** - This sets the rotation schedule. We can set `weekly`, `monthly` and etc. If it is `weekly`, logs will be rotated **once every week**. That means one file for logs is finished in one week and in the incoming week the new logs file is opened.
- **Version (or rotation count)** - It determines the count of rotations to save. So, if it is `4` and period is `weekly`, the system saves only 4 files. After one month from the starting, the log file of the first week is removed. Basically, it keeps **4 old versions**, then deletes the oldest one.
- **After Rotation** - We set mostly `create`, so after rotating a log file, old file is renamed (archived), a **new empty log file is created immediately**. Without this, some services might stop logging properly after rotation.
- **Naming of Rotation Files** - We set mostly `dataext`, this adds a **date suffix** to rotated files instead of just numbers.
- **Compress** - By default, this is commented out, so it is **disabled**. If enabled old logs are compressed (usually `.gz`), saves disk space.
- **Clean Seperation** - It tells logrotate “Also load additional per-service rules from this directory.” So, individual services like apache, cron can have their own rotation configs in `/etc/logrotate.d/`.

We can use `man logrotate` command to learn more about the rotation logic.