#logging #daemon #commands 

## **What is journald?**

The systemd-journald service stores log messages in the journal, a binary file that is temporarily stored in the file `/run/log/journal`. This file can be examined using the journalctl command.

The easiest way to use `journalctl` is by just typing the command. It shows that recent events have been written to the journal since your server last started.

---
## **Command**

`journalctl` commands gives lots of flexibility while working with `systemd-journald` logs.

#### `--since` and `--until`

```bash
journalctl --since "2024-06-01 08:00:00" --until "2024-06-01 10:00:00"
```

They set time interval. Both and just one can be used at the same time.

#### `-g`

```bash
journalctl -g "error"
```

It helps to display logs containing a specific word or message. 

---
## **Temporary and Permanent Storage of journald Logs**

The logs of `systemd-journald` is saved temporarily (RAM) in `/run/log/journal`. 

We can make it permanent easily. The config file is `/etc/systemd/journald.conf`.

We find here this line: `#Storage=auto`
(Before the change, we need to uncomment it)
It has 4 modes:

- `Storage=auto` → The journal will be written on disk if the directory `/var/log/journal` exists.
- `Storage=volatile` → The journal will be stored only in the `/run/log/journal` directory. (default one)
- `Storage=persistent` → The journal will be stored on disk in the directory `/var/log/journal`. This directory will be created automatically if it doesn’t exist.
- `Storage=none` → No data will be stored, but forwarding to other targets such as the kernel log buffer or syslog will still work.
***We mostly use `persistent` here.***

Afterward we need to restart `systemd-journald` service:

```bash
systemctl restart systemd-journald
```

Then we should run this command:
```bash
killall -USR1 systemd-journald
```

This command copies the logs from RAM to the persistent destination which we newly created.
