#disk #partitions #commands 

## **What is `fdisk` and `gdisk`?**

`fdisk` and `gdisk` are command-line tools to create, delete, and manage [[02. Partitioning and Its Types|partitions]]. `fdisk` is for MBR, `gdisk` is purely for GPT.

They are very similar, just few differences in terms of working style. When we run both, it opens `Command:` line. Where we can navigate the command. We can use `m` in `fdisk` and `?` in `gdisk` to get detailed information about navigation, so we can divide a [[01. Introduction to Disk|disk]] to partitions(s).

---
## **`fdisk` Usage**

#### Stage 1

We need to run `fdisk` command with disk name (path):

```bash
fdisk /dev/nvme0n2
```

This opens:
```
Welcome to fdisk (util-linux 2.37.4).
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
Be careful before using the write command.

Device does not contain a recognized partition table.
Created a new DOS disklabel with disk identifier 0xf07fba1d.

Command (m for help):
```

#### Stage 2

We type `m` for help and see the options we can use. Let's create a new disk partition. For that, we need to press `n`. When we press `n`:

```
Command (m for help): n
Partition type
   p   primary (0 primary, 0 extended, 4 free)
   e   extended (container for logical partitions)
Select (default p):
```

We have talked about primary and extended partitions before. Let's start with primary, so we can both type `p`, then press `Enter` or just press `Enter`. (because `p` is default, as you can see).

#### Stage 3

Then it requires to give a name to our partition:
```
Partition number (1-4, default 1):
```

Let's keep it as default and press `Enter`.

#### Stage 4

It asks for sector which means how much space to allocate for this partition:

```bash
First sector (2048-10485759, default 2048):
```

We should not touch the first sector, because it is not for our data or apps. That is basically a config store for our partition. Each partition has two sectors: 

- First Sector - The config data about the partition is stored there.
- Second Sector - The main sector for us. We allocate any space we want and use.

In the next stage, we will talk about the second sector.
#### Stage 5

It asks for the second sector now:
```bash
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-10485759, default 10485759):
```

We can allocate any space now. If we just press `Enter` and letting default to happen, it just gives all available space in the disk to our current partition (so our disk will have just one partition). However, mostly we need multiple partitions in a disk. So, let's give a specific space to this partition. To give 1 GB to this partition, we can type just `+1G`, or for 500 MB, type `+500M`.

I wrote `+1G` here and it prints:
```bash
Created a new partition 1 of type 'Linux' and of size 1 GiB.
```
 
The first partition is ready! Here we should type `w` to save changed and quit (If we press `q`, it will quit without changing the changes).
We can repeat the same process above to create more partitions from the disk.

#### Stage 6

After creating 3 (primary) partitions, when it comes to end, it is possible to create extended partition (and unlimited logical partitions inside it). 
So, when we press `n` to create a new partition, it asks:
```
Select (default e): e
```

As you can see, it already shows `e` as default which refers extended partition. Still we can press `p` and make the last partition primary too. However, let's continue as extended for now and press `e` here. It will prompt us for the name and let's keep as default. First and Second sectors are also the same process.

**The extended partition entry in the partition table only stores metadata** — start sector, end sector, and type. That metadata is ~1K. The actual disk space you assigned is reserved and sitting there, but the extended partition itself doesn't "consume" it visibly — it just marks the boundary.

Example:

```bash
NAME          MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINTS
sr0            11:0    1 12.7G  0 rom
nvme0n1       259:0    0   10G  0 disk
├─nvme0n1p1   259:1    0  600M  0 part /boot/efi
├─nvme0n1p2   259:2    0    1G  0 part /boot
└─nvme0n1p3   259:3    0  8.4G  0 part
  └─rhel-root 253:0    0  8.4G  0 lvm  /
nvme0n2       259:4    0    5G  0 disk
├─nvme0n2p1   259:5    0    1G  0 part
├─nvme0n2p5   259:6    0  1.5G  0 part
├─nvme0n2p2   259:9    0  500M  0 part
├─nvme0n2p3   259:10   0    1G  0 part
└─nvme0n2p4   259:13   0    1K  0 part
```

I have created 3 primary and 1 extended partition with 2 logical partitions. Although I have tried to allocate 1 GB for the last partition, it is seen as just 1 KB.

#### Stage 7

To delete any partition, we need to type `d` when it is prompted `Command:` and give the partition name.

---

## **`gdisk` Usage**

`gdisk` usage is very similar to `fdisk`. There are few differences:

- In `fdisk`, we use `m` to see all available commands. For `gdisk`, it is `?`.
- When we want to add a disk partition with the size of decimal number like `+1.5G`, we cannot do it in `gdisk` like that. We need to convert it to MB and write like `+1500M`.
- While creating a new partition from the disk, it asks for `Hex Code or Guid`. It is basically partition type, what the partition will be used for. We can fix it anytime by going back into `gdisk` and changing the type code with the `t` command, without losing any data. Common ones to use:
	- `8300` - Linux filesystem (default, most common)
	- `8e00` - Linux LVM
	- `fd00` - Linux RAID
	- `8200` - Linux swap

