#disk #filesystem #theory #commands

## **What is Filesystem and Need for Filesystem**

**A [[02. Partitioning and Its Types|partition]] is just raw empty space.** The [[01. Introduction to Linux|OS]] has no idea how to store or organize files on it yet. A filesystem is the structure you put on that partition that defines how files are stored, named, organized, and retrieved.

**Simple analogy:** the partition is an empty warehouse. The filesystem is the shelving system, labeling, and organizational rules inside that warehouse. Without it, you can't find or store anything properly.

----
## **Filesystem Types**

**When you format a partition** with `mkfs`, you're installing that organizational system onto the raw space.

**Common filesystems you'll work with in RHEL:**

- `ext4` — the classic Linux filesystem, stable and widely used, still common in many systems. It allows to reduce and increase the disk size afterward.

- `xfs` — default in RHEL 7, 8, and 9. Performs better with large files and large storage. This is what we use most in our labs and jobs. It allows only to increase not reduce the disk size afterward.

- `vfat` — used for USB drives and compatibility with Windows. Not for system partitions.

- `swap` — technically not a real filesystem, but a special partition type Linux uses as virtual memory overflow.

**RHEL 9 default is XFS** — important to know for your exam. If a question doesn't specify which filesystem to use, XFS is the safe answer.

The most famous filesystems in Microsoft:
- `fat32` — Old Microsoft filesystem, same as `vfat` in Linux. Very compatible — works on Windows, Linux, macOS, cameras, USB drives, anything. Limitation: max file size is 4GB (So if you try to copy a single file larger than 4GB to a FAT32 drive, it fails).
- `ntfs` — The modern Windows default filesystem. No 4GB file size limit, supports permissions, encryption, compression.

---
## **Commands**

The command used to define filesystem is `mkfs`:

```bash
mkfs.xfs /dev/nvme0n2p1 #For xfs
mkfs.ext4 /dev/nvme0n2p1 #For ex4
```


---
## **Flow**

**The flow so far:**

```
Disk → Partition → Filesystem → Mount → Use
```

