#disk #partitions 

## **Problem and Why It happens**

We have learned how to add a new disk and divide it to partitions, create a [[04. Filesystem|filesystem]] and [[05. Mounting|mount]] it successfully. After this point, we can use this disk properly to add, delete, remove and more stuff. 
However, when we use full disk space and it is needed to add new space to our current disk, the problem occurs here.

**The core problem** with standard partitioning is that partition sizes are fixed at creation time. Once you create a 10G partition and it fills up, you're stuck. You can't just "extend" it easily because the space next to it might already be taken by another partition.

You bought a new disk but can't easily merge it with an existing partition — they're separate fixed blocks.

---
## **What is Solution?**

**All of these problems are exactly what [[01. Introduction to Volume Group and Logical Volume Management|LVM]] solves** — flexible, resizable, multi-disk volumes without these limitations. We will talk about them in future lessons.

---
## **Temporary Solution**

In real cases we do not prefer such kind of architecture and don't mount directories directly to [[02. Partitioning and Its Types|partitions]], we prefere [[03. Volume Group|VG]] and [[05. Logical Volume Management|LV]] logic instead. However, if it exists anywhere and causes an issue (the space is full), we need to recover our data. Thus partition space needs to be extended, however normally partitions have fixed size. 

To solve the problem, we have a command which can help us to extend our partition. That is `growpart` command.

If there is a partition with full of data and also extra space in our disk, we can use `growpart` command here. We just need **unallocated free space on the same disk, right after that partition.** That free space usually appears when you expand the disk itself (like resizing a VM disk). `growpart` then stretches the existing partition into that free space.


> [!Warning] `growpart` Logic
> It takes from **unallocated space only** — space that doesn't belong to any partition. It will never touch or steal space from another partition.  `growpart` always takes **all** unallocated space — you can't specify a size.

The syntax:

```bash
growpart <DISK_NAME> <PARTITION_NUMBER>
xfs_growfs /mountpoint #Never forget to apply filesystem for new space
```

If that is our disk and its partition:

```
nvme0n3       259:6    0    5G  0 disk
└─nvme0n3p1   259:7    0    3G  0 part /data
```

We write: `growpart nvme0n3 1` and then the partition size will be `5G`.
