#disk #partitions #vg #lvm #filesystem #advance #commands

[[1. RHCSA Contents|ŌćÉContents]]
## **How to Extend LV?**

It is possible to extend space of [[05. Logical Volume Management|LV]] and that is main powerfull side. If our [[03. Volume Group|vg]] has enough space, we add some from here to our LV. We have a command to extend LV size:

```bash
lvextend -l +<SIZE> <LV_PATH>
lvextend -L +<SIZE> <LV_PATH>
```

Path needs to be something like `/dev/vg_name/lv_name`. The `+` sign means _add to existing size_. Without `+`, you're setting an _absolute_ target size, which can accidentally shrink the volume if you're not careful.

- With `-l` we add some percentage of the free space like `+50%FREE`. If we write just numbers there like `+100`, it add [[04. Physical Extend|physical extends]].
- With `-L` we add exact amount of space like `+1G` or `+500M`.

---

## **Filesystem**

When we type `df -h` command, we will not see that our LV space is increased. Because, we did not add a filesystem for the new space.  

We need to run this command after extending LV:

```bash
xfs_growfs /dev/vg_name/lv_name       # for XFS 
resize2fs /dev/vg_name/lv_name  # for ext4
```

Or just use `-r` flag with `lvextend` to do both in one shot:

```bash
lvextend -L +10G -r /dev/vg0/lv_data
```

---
## **How To Shrink LV?**

Shrinking LVM is riskier than growing ŌĆö you can lose data if you do it wrong. 

**For XFS ŌĆö you simply cannot shrink it.** XFS does not support shrinking at all. This is important for RHEL because XFS is the default filesystem. Your only option there is backup, reformat, restore.

The safe one-liner for ext4 (does both steps but prompts a warning) which shrinks filesystem, too:

```bash
lvreduce -L 8G -r /dev/vg_name/lv_name
#It assigns new size to 8G.
```

It will warn you that shrinking is destructive and ask you to confirm ŌĆö always read that warning carefully.